all right
Pulitzer prize-winning author and
oncologist Dr Siddharth Mukherjee has
probably done more than anyone else in
the world to demystify science and
medicine for people like you and me
his latest book the song of the cell is
in order to what he calls the basic unit
of life but then the book goes on to ask
the tantalizing and intriguing question
what is life joining us now is Dr
Mukherjee himself it's good to see you
Siddharth in person rather than the
other end of a crackly internet line
fascinating book the third after the
Emperor of maladies and the you know
your book on the gene
tell me before we talk about the book
what do you remember
about the first cell that you ever
cultured
well it was um it was at Oxford uh which
um when I was a graduate student you
know I had worked before I was a I had
worked before at when I was in college
uh on genes and genetics but not really
on Cell Biology
um and so I was at Oxford when I really
cultured my own first my first cells I
learned um so I had plated the cells at
night in the in the morning
um I took a look down the microscope and
it was a T cell and I was learning to
culture T cells and and amazingly there
it was sort of
um I call it sort of loom you know the
one thing is that when you learn to look
at cells you sort of become like a
gardener uh you know just the way you
look at plants
um you learn basically by looking at a
cell and I try to teach my students this
my graduate students this by looking at
a cell you can tell about tell a lot
about the life of the cell whether it's
happy whether it's unhappy just like you
can like gardeners look at plants
um and there it was I mean you know and
what's amazing about it is that while I
was looking at it it started moving and
you all of a sudden realize that you've
you've basically cultivated cultured or
you're you know you're holding life in
your hands but the analogy with the
gardening is very intriguing because
people sink to their plants and they
believe that the plants will Blossom if
you sing to them right one of the things
your book says is that we do not yet
know how to sink to ourselves we do not
understand their song
yeah I mean you know the the the the
title actually this interesting book
usually
um well I titled it I titled my books
very late in the book
um and the title sort of comes to me in
a kind of dreamy way um and I this book
had a different title
um and it wasn't working for a long time
and I was struggling with the title and
then it just came to me in a Flash and I
was like of course that's the title so
the title the song of the cell refers to
two ideas and two very important ideas
um the first idea is that
um
the we've we've talked a lot in the
public discourse about genes
um and genes are units of information
um they're carried in DNA the molecule
what's interesting is and what often
people don't realize is that genes
themselves are lifeless they are units
of Life they are they carry the
information to build life but they're
lifeless it's the cell that that's that
sings it out
um just like a musician sings out a
score a score is lifeless
um you need a symphony or a musician or
a group of musicians to play that score
and therefore enliven it in the same way
you need a cell to bring genes to life
it's otherwise lifeless so hence the
song
um but there's another song so that song
we are learning we're learning to read
we're learning to understand but there's
another song which is sort of we
encounter much later in the book and
that's the song or the
inter-communication between cells how
for instance one cell in the immune
system speaks to another cell in the
immune system and thereby creates what I
call a coordinated sense of life I mean
it's not random
um your you know those cells in your the
neurons in your brain speak to other
neurons in your brain that's not random
that song which is the song that goes
between cells is something that Still
Remains somewhat mysterious and was made
the fact that it was a mystery was it
made even more clear during the covet
pandemic yeah we'll come to covet but
you know um I think not many people who
are outside of medicine uh and science
understand what you explain in this book
that whether it is IVF whether it is
cancer whether it is depression whether
it is multiple sclerosis whether it is
HIV it all comes down to the self uh
both the sort of rebellion of the cell
as well as medicines attempt then to
treat the cell and therefore treat the
infection talk a little bit about that
well it's it's you know
um this is an idea that was really a
revolutionary idea
um initially by Rudolph workout and then
subsequently by many other people but
the idea
it's so simple that it's almost missed
which is that you know we think of many
things as caused by the environment or
the initiated by the environment or
psychosocial things depression being one
of them but ultimately for it to have an
effect in the human body it has to go
through a cellular
um through cells
um even diseases that we think are you
know psychosocial situational grief
depression uh all the way to you know
cancer as you said multiple sclerosis
ultimately is it has to do with this
function of cells so so the central
message in some ways in this book and of
course the central message in
um the world of biology is that
everything that we do every activity
every life activity that we do is based
on cells and every disease is a
dysfunction of cells so if you want to
do medicine if you want to learn
medicine if you want to understand the
basis of any disease and I I really mean
any disease you have to understand its
cell biological basis what's gone wrong
with the cell and how we can fix it
that's the basis of all medicine you
mentioned depression so let's talk about
that it's something you you've said is
personal for you I have spoken to you
before about your father yep uh your
father who fought Dementia in the later
years of his life then Falls eventually
dies from the fall he had a very very
moving piece in the New Yorker I think
we pulled it out as well for our viewers
and there's a beautiful photograph of
you with him and he dies and then you
who has actually been traumatized
because you know if your father's
dementia that maybe this is something
that will pass down in the family and
you speak about you know sort of almost
breezily about the madness in the
Mukherjee family quote unquote uh you
also battle depression
that experience your father and yourself
when you join the dots back to what you
now understand about the seller's unit
of life how do you join those dogs
well so
um you know one people think about
depression in many different ways it's a
little bit it's kaleidoscopic
um but to be
um you know you could have it as a
consequence of grieving and The Grieving
doesn't go away you could have it as
consequence of trauma you could have it
as a consequence of so many different uh
as I said
um psychosocial inputs but ultimately if
you look where it all impinges it has to
impinge on some nerve circuit somewhere
in your brain and that nerve circuit is
not functioning appropriately in uh it
that nerve circuit presumably regulates
mood so that your mood can swing up and
swing down you experience happiness when
the situation is happy in someone who's
depressed those uh Rio stats those the
capacity of your mood to swing
appropriately gets uh offset so that
even under situations which would
normally make you enjoy pleasure enjoy
happiness enjoy uh enjoy life
um doesn't doesn't function so even
depression ultimately turns out to be of
course a cellular disease
um and the first attempts to treat treat
depression
um were attempts to as you know change
um the chemicals that are responsible
for uh nerves speaking to each other so
drugs like Prozac and Paxil and Zoloft
and other drugs are drugs that attempt
to change the neurotransmitters but they
don't work very well
um part of the reason this is a
hypothesis they don't work very well is
that they really because we don't
understand depression at a cellular
level what's the nerve circuit that's
gone what's the mood regulating circuit
that's gone wrong how can we change that
mood regulating circuit and more and
more the belief that it's not just just
a simple circuit it's not like sparking
a wire or soldering a wire together but
in fact it's how those wires are
connected together with each other and
what the connections are How deep the
connections are
Etc that may be responsible for
someone's again for the inability of the
mood regulating circuits in the neuron
um I think that's helpful for many
reasons one of them is that it takes the
stigma of of depression and converts it
from a uh necessarily A psychosocial
grief related trauma-related disease
which it certainly is and looks for it
looks for a biological locus of it and
and you know typically when you start
looking for biological loci of diseases
you suddenly realize that it's your body
that's malfunctioning it's not something
you're doing that's wrong which is
typically the the you know the language
and the rhetoric around mental illness
particularly somehow associated with the
weakness yeah with weaknesses you know
you're doing something you know snap out
of it yeah you know slap yourself out of
it yeah you can't slap your neurons and
you can't slap your neurons out of it
how did you deal with your own
depression were you able to apply this
prism of science looking in when you
turn the lens on yourself
um I mean you know in many ways yes and
in many ways no I mean you know when you
experience something in yourself you
can't often turn the prism of science to
yourself but uh but it was to be honest
it was helpful to know and to understand
that there was an organic I mean in
biology we use the word organic to
describe an illness that originates in
cell biology or in biology
um it was and as opposed to something
hallucinatory or ghostly or something
that lies outside yourself to somatize
it to make it into something that's part
of your body and to think about it as
part of your body made for me it was
very helpful because I thought to myself
okay well you know some people have
broken limbs some people you know break
their bones in my case some circuit in
my brain is broken
um and
um my job is to fix it now how does one
fix it obviously it's a combination of
medicines um various forms of
Psychosocial Help Therapy
etc etc but but but even the simple
assumption that it's not my fault that I
can't slap my neurons out of it as it
were was really helpful
you you describe the cell um as the
basic unit of life and then you say but
what is life and one of the conclusions
you reach is that it's like a menu it
isn't any one thing it's many things
simultaneously what are some of these
many things well so the definition of
life has been very challenging
ironically for uh for scientists I mean
you would think that you would be very
easy
um but it turns out it's not it's not
very easy and in fact
um uh life is defined along as
possessing some qualities I'll give you
some of the quality I can't give you all
of them
um so one very important quality is
um metabolism so the capacity to turn
nutrients into energy which is the
fundamental piece of uh is is a feature
of life
um uh reproduction so if you can't if if
a cell can't reproduce or if organism
contributes there won't be any more
organisms so that's one of the
definitions of life
um a third one is a peculiar long word
I'm written a lot about it a homeostasis
which is the capacity of a system
whatever it might be to restore balance
um very old idea in science even
Aristotle spoke about it there's Vedic
writings about it or they don't use the
word homeostasis but it means the
restoration of restoration to a normal
your body when it's put into just to
give you one example if I if I throw you
into the Antarctic your body will have
all these systems that will get
activated to regulate your Heats uh
internal heat so that it comes back to
as close back to normal as possible
that's an example of homeostasis so
these are some examples metabolism
reproduction homeostasis are some
examples I'll give you things that
something that life is not so for
instance sentience or Consciousness or
even the idea of agency are not
requirements for life sentience is not a
requirement for you don't even have to
be a sentient human being yeast for
instance yeast cells or many cells in
your body are not sentient they are not
they have sensors but they don't have
Consciousness they don't have so those
are not requirements for life but the
other ones are now
if I were to say this in a kind of
rudimentary person's language my
understanding of this is what keeps us
alive uh also damages us sometimes
simultaneously hence cancer hence
several autoimmune diseases your book
starts with a friend who is fighting a
faith turns out to be a fatal illness uh
you think he's getting better eventually
he's called Sam in the book eventually
he dies
now talk about
your research where you are using T Cell
Therapy in clinical trials in India I
don't know how many people know about
this but many more people need to know
about it joining hands with Kieran Shaw
and actually using this therapy in
clinical trials to treat people with
cancer how is this working what is the
sort of science behind it well the
science behind it is uh is quite
astonishing
um and we've actually developed this
science further we have a full unit in
in Bangalore which is uh working on this
and
um we'll uh do a a very broad press
release uh next week uh we've already
presented the data at one of the most
important seminars of in cancer called
the American Society of hematology
meeting we presented six five or six uh
papers there uh probably the record
number for any company in India
um the um the the basis of the therapy
is that T cells are extracted from the
body
um they are genetically engineered in a
very sort of almost a sanctuary very
very hyper hygienic Sanctuary one single
bacterium one single contaminant can
destroy the entire culture so T cells
are extracted from a cancer patient's
body genetically engineered and then
read directed their capacity to to kill
cells which is their natural capacity is
redirected to kill cancer cells and
they're re-infused back into the body
um and um with phenomenal success for
certain cancers leukemias lymphomas
mostly blood cancers we my lab is now
very actively trying to extend this into
um cancers that were previously
untreatable
um and
um I mean as I said we'll release the
full set of data uh fourth forthcomingly
but we've been extraordinarily uh
extraordinary pleased because we've done
I ask you this because we're emerging
from the shadows of well three years of
covet yeah and your book talks uses a
very interesting sort of cultural
reference where you speak about the
virus as vamana and um and Humanity or
the you know human body is mahabali this
uh this sort of illustrative example
speak about it well you know my books
are um interest I mean funny in the
sense that I throw in mythology
um sometimes I borrow from uh Greeks
sometimes I borrow from in you know
stories uh there are all sorts of things
that are going in but but this
particular thing of course I mean I
don't want to cast the virus I mean this
is just a kind of a a more of a story
yeah there's a there's a there's a fair
degree of poetic license but the
important thing about all of this is in
this in the famous story
um you know the uh the uh the tiny man
um is uh asks for uh enough land Bali is
a you know obviously a magnanimous demon
king
um and the tiny man approaches him and
asks for enough land that he can cover
in three strides and uh marbly sort of
laughs it off and says of course you can
have three strides of land and the then
the first stride of land is across the
Earth the second stride of land uh it's
stuck in stride is across the heavens
and the third there's no more land to
give and so he pushes his head on uh
mahabali's foot on Marble's head
um and vanquishes him but the idea was
that you know we were so puffed up I
mean by we I mean the community of
scientists
um in researchers were so puffed up
about our capacity to understand
virology and Immunology that we thought
we had understood everything and then
all of a sudden this tiny little virus
that you can't even see microscopic
crosses you know with one foot crosses
across five continents six continents
and
um and in you know in three strides all
of a sudden really brings us to our feet
it humbles us hobbles us mature Health
Care Systems the United States the
United Kingdom and of course you know
populous states India China Etc are
totally hobbled humbled by this virus
but also the scientific Community is
hobbled and humbled um because
um all of a sudden we are discovering
things about Immunology about the immune
system that we'd never discovered we
haven't never knew before
um and so again with a little bit of
poetic license I sort of really feel as
if there was a kind of moment kind of
come to come to Reckoning moment
um not only for the Public Health
Community not only for the for for the
political world but also for the
scientific world and hence the hence
that analogy I mean I think the
wonderful things about your book is that
they embrace
of science the
missed course what science May address
in the future but hasn't yet and I think
I was reading one of your conversations
where you said that we should be able to
say we don't know we don't know we don't
know so what do we still not know about
covet
well there are many things that we don't
know I mean it's constantly evolving
first of all right now we right now at
this very minute we don't know what's
happening in China and we really need to
know because
um because what's happening there
yesterday was gonna happen here tomorrow
um whatever it might be whether it's a
whether it's a benign strain of or a
relatively benign strain there's no
benign strain but whether it's a
relatively less pathogenic strain or
whether it's a more pathogenic strain is
something we need to know because it's
going to come in some direction or the
other
um
but on a basic science level
um what kovid revealed is that uh you
know we had we have this um we had a
very methodological or methodic
understanding of how immunity works
against a virus so we thought that you
know when a virus infects the body you
you know the body mounts an immune
response that immune response is
methodical it undergoes a certain series
of uh or a certain passage of uh
maturity until you mount a mature immune
response and you clear the virus covert
really defied that
um uh this phrase was coined during
covid which has been in the scientific
Community called immunological misfiring
it turns out that the SARS gov2 virus
has a perhaps a unique or perhaps not a
unique capacity we don't know but a
capacity to contort or distort the
immune system such that the method the
methodical way in which we thought that
viruses are attacked by the immune
system was totally disrupted and in fact
all of a sudden we are realizing that
there are things about the way viruses
interact with the immune system that we
may have ignored so for instance lots of
people are talking about long covet but
maybe there are long syndromes for a lot
of other viruses we don't know because
we haven't looked long code forced us to
look that's one example so for instance
there are people who've been for decades
saying that
um you know that many of these many
autoimmune diseases or uh the many
diseases that have been lumped broadly
into chronic fatigue are actually long
viral syndromes may not be true may be
true but now it's a testable hypothesis
um and so we're all of a sudden
revisiting a lot of these sort of old
ideas which we've thrown out
um and revisiting them and thinking well
maybe there's a virus Banning maybe
there's a virus behind
um you know some autoimmune problem
which we hadn't noticed before because
we hadn't been looking properly
fascinating but let's go from what we
don't notice some of the things we do
okay IVF in
I think you call it uh one of the most
profound sort of cell therapies that has
in turn led to I may not be quoting you
verbatim but a kind of human
manipulation what do you mean by that
well so IVF IVF in vitro fertilization
of course has enabled
um some very important things in human
history uh obviously there are some
people not everyone but some people have
an aching desire to have a child they
cannot other people don't may not have
the desire
um but some people do IVF solves that
desire that kind of suffering for those
people who want
um to have a biological child yeah
important to say that
um you know there are greater social
goods that other people might want like
adopting a child or not having a child
but for some people it is an important
form of suffering the in the the the the
the the sidebar to all of this is that
IVF also externalizes the early embryo
by externalizes I mean it's in a Petri
dish and once it's in a pizza dish you
can do things in a Petri dish that you
can't do inside the human body including
things like gender selection including
things like maybe genetic changing
something in the in the embryo and so
all of a sudden you've entered a
territory which is ethically complicated
biologically complicated Etc so IVF you
know might start off by by being a
reproductive method but it really
becomes very quickly uh things that are
maybe highly undesirable and highly
ethically and morally complicated and I
point this out in the book you often
have Technologies like this where you
you begin with with some piece of
technology and all of a sudden you're in
in a place where it's completely
different from what the origins of that
technology in your conversation with
Amita of course in Kolkata you
this sort of engineering and it probably
will get more and more enabled and
stronger
could also be used to curb civil
liberties you know what the fingerprint
is today
right you know what what could that look
like let's talk a little bit about the
new human your book also talks about
right what the new human might look like
what the new debates the ethical debates
the debates around human rights uh might
look like yeah so I mean you know there
there have been
um there have um I mean this is less to
do with cells and more to do with with
with
genetic uh with with genes in general
but of course these are related I told
you how exactly they're related but um
but uh one you know Amita and I were
talking about the possibility of genetic
fingerprinting so we were sitting in
alipur jail which of course is one of
the places where human fingerprinting
was in invented
um uh as a method of identification of
people and now we've gone on from Human
fingerprinting to much more complicated
things like genetic fingerprinting so
um we think of genetic fingerprinting in
the context of forensic and criminal
forensics and criminology and certainly
in the United States and elsewhere it's
allowed us to for instance you know
determine criminals
using for instance blood left on the
scene allowed us to find a really
perpetrators of horrible crimes
including rape and and Etc
um in some ways of course enabling uh
forensics and criminology there is of
course a dark side to all of this and
that is that we've seen the possibility
of every technology being perverted by a
surveillance States and so you can
imagine that you know you use the same
technology for tracking migrants
tracking dissidents tracking people that
you know should be protected uh but
instead become vulnerable because you
know they leave a fingerprint so I guess
my point with Amitabh which we both
share is that obviously technology has
has has two sides and this is one
example of the the two-sided nature of
of this technology in particular
let's come back to
[Music]
back to the cellular citizenship what
does it mean
well um you know in the in when you get
uh what I call Mega cellular organisms
like human beings
um you often have to have systems of
cells that can't live selfishly cancer
is an example of a selfish cell its own
so it's sort of sole purpose is to make
more copies of itself and take over the
take over the body
um but is that a kind of narcissism
I mean I again cancer cells don't have
agency yeah but it's a kind of cellular
narcissism uh if one was to was to again
use some uh poetic license but uh but uh
but more importantly I think
um the idea of a cellular civilization
is that cells in order for them to
function in the body is take an example
of your heart
um there are you know hundreds of
millions of cells in your heart and yet
if the hundreds of millions of cells
were to were to pump discordantly uh you
wouldn't have blood circulation they
would just be a wobbling balloon but
they do not do that they function
coordinately and they are very specific
reasons biological reasons biochemical
Reasons by which they function in a
coordinated Manner and only that
coordinated function allows them to you
know create a pump similarly the brains
in yourself are the cells in your brain
sorry
um could be you know if they were
discordant with each other you wouldn't
have a single thought no thought would
spot through your brain so the idea of a
cellular civilization is is the idea
that that these large Mega collections
of cells have to function coordinately
with each other sing to each other as it
were to go back to the title of the book
in order for your human body to function
and that's a consequence of of you know
Millennial Evolution yeah but you know
the book talks about in the space that
what we don't know the liver and the
spleen for example you have this example
where you do not know why the liver is
susceptible to a certain kind of cell
behavior that the spleen is not and
therefore you know it's a bewildering
um the sort of space which you can't
in a way apply what we know so far too
do we know why this happens well we
don't and in fact that's a very
important question I mean this question
was asked in the you know late 19th
century by the surgeon's um pageant uh
the English surgeon who basically said
you know why is the liver a frequent
site of cancer metastasis whereas the
spleen which is just next to it
um is not a frequent site of cancer
metastasis why
um to understand that you can't look at
the genome Gene sequencing won't under
help you sell biology will and so you
have to return back to very fundamental
questions about cells in order to
understand solve that question and
solving that question is important
because we need to understand how cancer
metastasizes where it metastasizes too
because of course metastasis is what
kills you in the end yeah finally at the
end uh you know there are certain
exciting developments like the T Cell
Therapy that you're trying in India but
as you said there's a lot you don't know
is there one dimension of something
you've been researching that makes you
anxious or frustrated because try as you
may that breakthrough isn't coming that
wall isn't crumbling or even cracking
well I wouldn't you know
um the
um we've been trying a lot we've
actually written a lot about it and we
by we I mean my whole research team
collaborators etc etc we've been trying
to understand we know a lot about the
metabolism of cancer so cancer is
dependence on certain nutrients but
we've yet to be able to exploit those
vulnerabilities that cancer cells have
and make them into a drug so one
question that we've always you know
banged our heads again have been further
for a while is how can we use our
understanding of the metabolism of
cancer what cancer eats
um and try to make that into a very
viable form of therapy so imagine diet
as a drug against cancer so we put a lot
of effort into this we've made some
inroads into this in fact we have a big
trial
um that is looking at at this um I
founded a a company called Fayette
f-a-e-t-h that's going to look at this
in Greater detail
um and I hope we find something but
we're on on to something but it seems
like a dim signal that that uh that sort
of like a flickering fire in the forest
right now well the dim signal is is the
way out of that sort of the only way out
here it's the only way out I'll always
learn so much from talking to you from
reading your books everybody if you
haven't read it sell the song of the
cell is fascinating uh it is brilliant
don't be scared if you're like me and
you're somewhat you know sort of a lay
person this makes science accessible and
that is the brilliant thing about uh
siddharth's writing thank you thank you
thank you